Professor: Now let’s look at two
more very popular audio effects.
And before we look at them
in EarSketch,
I first want to look at them
inside of Ableton Live,
a very popular digital audio
workstation program.
The first one I want to talk
about is volume,
which is simply about how loud
or soft a sound is.
And when we change the volume
of the sound,
we adjust its gain.
We use a unit called “decibels”
to do that,
which is sometimes abbreviated
as dB.
And we can go
from minus 60 decibels,
which is basically silent,
up to zero decibels,
which is the same volume
as the original sound,
or we can go into positive
numbers
up to positive 12 decibels,
which would be much louder
than the original sound.
Now, usually, we want to stay
between negative 60
and zero decibels,
because when we get
into the positive numbers,
sometimes we can cause
some distortion to the sound,
which we don’t usually want.
If we were doing this
in EarSketch,
the name of the effect
would be "volume."
The effect parameter we’d be
modifying would be gain,
and then the values could go
from minus 60 to positive 12.
We can do a similar thing
in Ableton Live.
I have a sound loaded here,
and this orange slider here
lets me change the gain
and the decibels of that sound.
Right now,
you can see it’s at zero,
for zero dB,
zero decibels.
And I’m going to go ahead
and play the sound,
lower that slider so that
it makes it softer,
and then raise it back up
so it makes it louder again.
[electronic musical scales]
So as I’m changing that slider
over time,
we can think about doing
something like that
through an effect envelope
as well.
And we can also think about that
in terms of fade-in and fade-out
envelopes.
So a fade-in envelope goes
from softer to louder over time.
A fade-out envelope goes from
louder to softer over time.
Another way we can think about
working with volume in a DAW
is through the idea of mixing,
that we have a bunch
of different tracks
for adjusting the volume
on each of them so that we get
a good balance
in terms of the loudness
of each track,
relative to each other track.
And this is a very common thing
that people do
in recording studios and
production environments
as they're preparing a song
to be released.
The other effect I want to talk
about is a filter.
And specifically,
we’re going to talk
about a low-pass filter today.
The one parameter we’re going
to modify on it
is the frequency of the filter.
In EarSketch,
the name of the effect
is “filter,” and the parameter
to change its frequency
is filter frequency.
So let me explain for a minute
how this works,
again by going
into Ableton Live.
So I have a low-pass filter
loaded here.
And as I change its frequency,
I always allow the lower
frequencies of the sound—
the lower parts of the sound—
to pass through to stay.
But I cut out some of the higher
kind of brighter parts
of the sound.
So as I lower this filter
frequency,
it will make the sound
seem darker.
And then as I raise that filter
frequency again,
it will make the sound seem
brighter again.
Frequency is a way of measuring
how high or low a sound,
or parts of a sound, are.
And the range of human hearing
for frequency goes from 20 hertz
up to 20,000 hertz.
And so the frequencies that we
use in EarSketch
or any other digital audio
workstation program
go in that same range,
between 20 hertz
and 20,000 hertz,
from low to high.
So you can see,
this is at 19.9,
so that’s about 20,000 hertz
right now,
and I’m going to lower it
way down.
And then I’ll raise it back up
so that you can hear
what that changed filter
does to the brightness
and darkness of the sound.
[electronic music darkens]
So now I’ve cut out
all the higher frequencies,
so it sounds very dark.
Now I’ll start bringing them
back in again.
[electronic music brightens]
So as we’re changing that,
again thinking of this in terms
of envelopes,
we can think of this in terms
of a filter sweep,
a very common music production
technique,
where we take the filter
frequency and we change it
over time, either moving it up
or moving it down
to change the timber
of the sound.